Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor David Bader Woods. He's
an associate professor in the department of philosophy at
the University of Warwick, and today we're talking about
his new book, Arthur Schopenhauer, The Life and Thought
of Philosophy's Greatest Pessimist. So, Doctor Bather Woods, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Hi, thank you, it's a pleasure to talk with
you today.
So let me just ask you first, what got
you interested in Schopenhauer and his philosophy?
Good, so Schopenhauer was my gateway philosopher. I started
thinking about philosophical questions. In fact, I was probably
thinking about philosophical questions for a long time as
a, you know, as a child and certainly as
a teenager. I liked going into that level of
depth about any given topic. But then I realized
that was a thing, it was called ship of,
you know, philosophy. And there was a sort of
few questions I was particularly interested in. I, I
was like. Interested in sort of more theoretical questions,
questions about free will and determinism, and I discovered
this essay that Schopenhauer had written that he'd submitted,
I later learned as a uh you know, as
part of a competition, which he won in that
case, um, on the freedom of the will. And
reading it was just a transformative experience because I
found him so clear. And he had views that
were in sympathy with my kind of naive assumptions,
but had communicated them with such precision and gone
so much further, and he was so entertaining, um,
it was, it was really, you really felt like
you could meet him there in the text, whereas
lots of other philosophers, I felt like there was
always barriers. I tried reading Kant and Heidegger and
people like that, and it was just hard to
wrestle with. So Schopenhauer was like a nice invitation
that felt like there was depth there, but it
wasn't inaccessible and he wanted you to know what
he meant. So that was how I got interested
in Schopenhauer and then it's just been an abiding
influence ever since, like I wrote my undergraduate dissertation
on Schopenhauer, I wrote my PhD thesis on Schopenhauer
and I've continued to write and read about him
ever since.
Mhm. OK, so let's talk then about what you
explore in the book, his life and philosophy. You
start the book by exploring his life when he
was in the grip of both uh midlife crisis
and the global health crisis. So tell us about
that bit.
Yeah, well I suppose I started the book or
the idea for the book during the, the pandemic.
I remember having a, a Zoom er seminar with
a few colleagues to talk about an idea I
was writing about Schopenhauer on solitude or um given
that we were all self-isolating, I was interested in
the question of the value of solitude and the
value of sociability. Um, AND then. I hadn't realized
until starting to really research the book and going
in a more biographical direction, that of course Schopenhauer
lived through a pandemic, you know, cholera, which er
we do think of, like if you think of
a, Any 19th century novel, probably cholera, somebody's gonna
die of cholera. Either cholera or tuberculosis, because it
was really prevalent, it was kind of, there was
a, a big pandemic of uh cholera early in
the 19th century and then a second wave uh
in the 1830s that really ripped through Europe. And
Schopenhauer was caught in that, um, in particular as
it manifested in, in Berlin. Uh, BUT it was
also in Berlin, it was towards the end of
his, one of the most, you know, disappointing periods
of his life. For a man who thought that
life was just endlessly disappointing, if that's saying something.
And, um, and so it was kind of an
interesting. Pivotal moment to start in where the world
is kind of frightening and frightening in a way
that readers would be familiar with, having all of
us, I think lived through a pandemic of a
different disease. And then er you know, having a
very personal significance for Schopenhauer cos it's the moment
when he is weighing up whether to stay in
a city where everything had gone wrong, he'd gone
there to teach and hadn't had much success as
an academic. So yeah, it seemed like the right
place to sort of see Schopenhauer at kind of
his lowest ebb in order maybe to build him
back up throughout the book.
I'm, and I mean, you mentioned solitude. What role
do you think solitude played in Schopenhauer's life?
Yeah, pretty consistent role, I think he was, I
mean he had a few. A very few close
friends, particularly in the first half of his life,
um, he had one friend who was a. The
son of one of his father's French business associates,
who, who was kind of came in and out
of Schopenhauer's life. Um, Jeanine, uh, Gregoire, uh, and,
um. That was really his only really close friend
in his in his childhood. Um, AND his sister
as well who came along when Schopenhauer was about
9 or 10. Other than that, he just struggled
to have any kind of intimate relationships, you know,
meaningful, profound relationships. And so he was a quite
a solitary, you know, lonely man. By circumstance and
disposition. But he works that out in his philosophy,
he kind of gives a. A kind of philosophical
basis on which to defend the condition of solitude,
that it, that it might be in some ways
a virtue to be able to, spend time with
yourself, be comfortable in your own company, and it
might even be, A condition of certain other values
like being able to think for yourself without too
much outside influence, um, and so you know, he
was solitary as a person, as a biographical fact,
but he also thought that he also gave a
kind of philosophical defense of, of solitude and it's
grounded in the idea that. Um, SOLITUDE is. A
precondition of being able to, to think for yourself,
to be able to come to your own conclusions,
which was a really important intellectual value for him.
Um, IF, if something isn't the result of thinking
for yourself, he, he seems to think it's not
in a way not real knowledge, which is kind
of an interesting stance on knowledge because we might
think that knowledge is just about having the correct
information, the correct facts, but he actually focuses quite
heavily on where, where the information comes from. Whether
it's been really gathered and chewed over by yourself
and and and and therefore becomes a kind of
organic part of your, Um, of your system of
beliefs or what have you, or whether it's kind
of a Frankenstein's monster of bits and pieces you've
scraped together from sources that you haven't really considered
critically, so it's quite interesting that he thinks that
knowledge, good quality knowledge is as much about the
process by which you, you come to it. Um,
SO that's why he thinks thinking for yourself in
a condition of solitude is the, is the best
way to know the world.
So there's also an element of self-reliance in his
philosophy. Correct.
Yeah, absolutely, you know, um, he does think, I
mean to the point where. To the point where
it becomes a little bit implausible, like these days,
I think we are happy to acknowledge that. Human
beings have indissoluble social needs. And there's something irreducibly
valuable about interacting, like, like you and I are
now, right? We're not just here to have a
knowledge exchange, you and I, by talking together, deriving
all sorts of. Things that are making our day
go better than just than just a knowledge interchange.
Yeah. Um, THAT'S something that Schopenhauer kind of studiously
ignores, you know, perhaps because he, he has to
reckon with the fact that he doesn't have a
lot of people in his life to, to derive
that kind of value from, what have you. So
he goes to great lengths to. Give alternative explanations
for where sociability comes from, like for instance, he
thinks ultimately people socialize just because they're, they're bored,
you know, and, and, and by disposition we actually
find each other very, you know, hard to take
and intolerable, but, but we become so bored if
we don't eventually kind of interact with somebody that
that it um that it drives us back into
society and so on. So yeah, so he almost
overdoes the whole self-reliance, the whole solitary lone wolf
thing er by today's standards. But because of that
kind of blind spot, it means he he has
to do a lot of work thinking about the
value of solitude, so he goes really deep in
that direction of what the value of solitude is,
um. So it's, yeah, even though I do think
he was a bit blind to the value of
sociability, um, I do think it made him really
focused on the idea of solitude in a way
that um means he develops lots of the depths
and details of why it's important to be, you
know, to be self-reliant. In particular again cognitive self-reliance,
he's not really talking that much about. Emotional self-reliance
too much or material self-reliance, he's not talking about
Thoreau going into the woods and being able to
chop your wood, not that I think that Thoreau
actually apparently lived that kind of really that kind
of secluded existence, but he's not talking about, you
know, paddling your own canoe and, you know, whatever.
Uh, IT'S, it's cognitive self righteous that really being
a free thinker in, in, in, in the true
sense of all your views coming from yourself.
Mhm. So I, I wanted to ask you, I
mean, I was thinking about saving this question for
later after we went through all of the main
events in his life and the, the main aspects
of his philosophy, but perhaps I will ask it
now. So, uh, I mean, to what extent do
you think his philosophy was informed. By his own
psychological predispositions because I mean, I'm not saying or
claiming that all of his psychology was uh innate
in some way that he was born with it,
but perhaps there was some of that, but, but
he also went through some particular kinds of experiences
that we can talk more about in our conversation.
But I, I mean, sometimes philosophers get a little
bit upset if, for example, someone says that maybe
the philosophy of a particular philosophy, philosopher was very
influenced by his own psychological predispositions instead of just
looking into his arguments and if they are sound
or solid or something like that. But in the
particular case of Schopenhauer, I mean, would you say
that perhaps his pessimism was, uh, a, um, I
mean, the result of his own psychological predispositions, at
least to, to an extent?
Yeah, it's, it's a really interesting area like both
in. In looking at Schopenhauer, and looking at philosophy
and biography, you know, in general. And I want
to try to be really careful. About You know,
specifying that relationship because yeah, you're right, you want
to, you, you want to avoid a kind of
really crude, psychological reductionism or or biographical fallacy where
you think that all of his views are just
expressions and functions of his of his temperament, of
his biography and and so on, you know. N
Nietzsche kind of skirts that line a little bit
in the way that he sometimes discusses Schopenhauer, and
even Nietzsche, you know, famously says that all philosophy
is unconscious autobiography or something like that. Uh, WHICH
is a, it's an interesting idea. I don't, I,
you know, I'm sure there's more to, to Ntsche's
view than that. Um, AND especially when it comes
to making evaluative judgment, you know, it would, I
think it would be a fallacy to say, for
instance, well, Scherenhauer's pessimism is philosophically groundless because it's
all just him working out his, you know, grief
and anguish about the, some of the tragic events
that happened in his life. That would be obviously
wrongheaded, um. So we need to avoid those dangers.
On the other hand. On the other hand, I
mean, I think it's It is interesting context. To
consider, you know, his views. In light of his
life. Um, SO for instance, some, some, some of
the views that might seem surprising turn out not
to be as wild and surprising as, as one
might think. Uh, HIS views on sexuality, for instance,
at first I thought, wow, he must be, he's
really, um, going out on a limb here because
for instance he discusses same-sex relationships briefly. Um, AND
his views on that are kind of. A little
bit iffy, to say the least, but it's interesting
nonetheless that a person in the 19th century, 19th
century Europe would be talking about those things. But
then the more I look into it, the more
I realize that actually there were others too who
were who were trying to say similar things and
maybe even say things that were more advanced than
what Schopenhauer's thinking on these on these topics. Same
with maybe his views on race and and and
so on. Um, OR if you look at the,
you know, he, he often tries to put his
own pessimism in context by giving loads of quotations
from sources that go all the way back to
the ancients, whether it be both Eastern and Western
traditions. Um, AND put it on a real, you
know, a real philosophical footing, you know, where, where
you can see, well, no, this isn't just one
man's battle with his temperament. This is something that
human beings have been. You know, writing about, I
mean the the the idea that maybe we shouldn't
have been born is something that, and I thought
that human beings have been. Mulling over for yeah
for literally mill millennia, um, so, so I, I
find it. I find it helpful to look at
the ideas in context. Um, I actually find it
sometimes helps to, to look at it both ways,
which is. Not just to think of, not, not
just to look at his ideas in the light
of the events in his life. Whether his ideas
may have came from, but actually looking backwards, which
is to kind of use his own ideas as
a way of interpreting his life events, right, um,
which I think is a nice sometimes way of
getting around the, this kind of genetic fallacy, is
that we're not saying that his ideas have come
out of that, um. Simply, you know, and straightforwardly
come out of those events, but now, you know,
once we've got those ideas in place, we can
use those ideas to analyze and interpret his life
events. So his views on suicide, for instance, you
know, because his own father died in what was
suspected to be a suicide when Schopenhauer was a
teenager. You know, I think the crude reductionist view
would be, oh well, his views are all just
a function of er his views on suicide is
just a function of um his, his the biographical
facts of his life and what have you. But
and a kind of more interesting way to look
at it is say well these are the facts,
these are what happened in his life, these are
the views that he can give a philosophical grounding
for, and now can we use the views as
a way of interpreting the facts. Uh, CAN we,
can we use that as a way of shedding
light and understanding his life events better. So that's
something I try and do in the book as
well, is try and read the events in the
light of the ideas rather than the other way
around. So. So yeah, I have, I haven't managed
to be as um specific as I, I think
it's hard to be totally precise and specific. I
suppose the one thing I can say for sure
is that I, I'm not of the view that
biography has nothing to do with philosophy. I think
they have everything to do with each other, even
though I think you need to avoid certain fallacies
um of just reducing theo the philosophy to the
life events.
OK, so let's talk about the topic of punishment.
First of all, before we get into Schopenhauer's philosophy
about that and what he had to say about
it, in what ways was Schopenhauer exposed to punishment
in his early life?
Yeah, there's, there's a very famous, um, a kind
of another pivotal moment in Schopenhauer's life which I,
which I discussed in the book and which is
in, I think all the biographies. Which is, um,
his parents, when Schopenhauer was a teenager in the
early 1800s, um, his parents took him on a
grand tour of Europe which was very fashionable for,
you know, upper middle class families at the time,
um. And the Schopenhauer family were quite cosmopolitan, internationalist,
and that, you know, er they enjoyed world literature
and international culture and so on. Um, IT was
offered to Schopenhauer sort of as a little bit
of a bribe actually as well, cos he already
was showing signs that he might not want to
go into his father's business of being a, a
shipping merchant. And they said, well, come along, you
know, as a kind of appeasement, come along for
this wonderful 2 year grand tour, and when you
come back there you've got to go and become
a merchant and what have you. But as part
of it, um, one of the kind of more
grisly sides of early 19th century tourism, which would
be unthinkable today I guess, unless it was very
kind of veiled. Is that they would go to.
Sites of human suffering, um, they would go to
visit prisons and work camps, um, they would even
visit asylums in some cases like the Schopenhauer nearly
visited Bedlam Asylum when it was loc at the
time located in central London. Um, ALTHOUGH even by
then in the early 19th century, we're talking 1803,
1004, it was closed to the public, so already
there was a shift in attitude that this was
really inhumane to kind of show these people off
as a spectacle. But what was still there as
a spectacle in, in France, so in, in, in,
um, on the south coast of France, there was
the very famous Baue of Toulon, which was an
open air. Slave labor camp, and um if you've
ever seen the trailer maybe for Les Miserables, the
film version, if you've read the novel that's even
better, but, um you might have caught the um,
you know, Hugh Jackman, who plays Jean Valjean, um
pulling these huge, you know, ship masts and stuff
and you know, these enormous chains and things because
the character of Valjean is, is, is imprisoned in,
in this uh labor camp. And actually Schopenhauer was
there at the time when, Hugo, um. McDougall, who
wrote the er the novel Les Miserables, sets the,
the events and um Sherman actually saw these men.
Being, you know, literally chained to their benches, chained
to one another, they would, they would have some
of the most serious offenders would have their sentences
and their crimes branded on their skin. I've read
anyway. Um, REALLY horrendous inhumane stuff. And as a
teenager, Schopenhauer was about, I don't know, 1516. Uh,
AT the time, and, uh, he, he writes in
his diary how shocked he is. Um, IT really
is an awakened, later he reflects on it like,
like the Buddha's awakening, like, um. Like a prince
who's been lived a sheltered life, coming out and
seeing the world and realizing it's just all death
and suffering, things like that. Um So he knew
a lot about suffering and uh you know punishment
um and and how inhumane it can be, and,
and, and if you, you know, use that as
a way into his work, you can see there's
just, there's, Metaphorical and literal examples of punishment just
everywhere, it's one after I think business metaphors, which
is, that can also be read biographically given his
backstory. After business metaphors and financial metaphors, I think
metaphors of punishment appear most frequently in the way
that Schopenhauer tries to articulate his pessimism. Mhm
And so what did he write on the topic
of punishment? How did he approach it philosophically?
Yeah, so if we're thinking about literal punishment, um,
it's quite easy to discern Schopenhauer's views. He was
very firmly a deterrentist. Um, HE thought there was
no such thing as deserved punishment. He was rather
like Jeremy Bentham. Jeremy Bentham famously had a horror
of the idea of somebody deserving to suffer because
he just thought suffering is just negative, you know,
it's just a bad thing. Um, AND so it's
never deserved even if maybe it can be justified
in, in, you know, for some kind of more
future orientated goal like, like setting a. An effective
deterrent, and Schopenhauer's very much of that camp and
there's more in his political philosophy than he does
to to justify a deterrent theories, theory of punishment.
Um, IF we're talking about metaphors of punishment though.
Um, HE thinks that one way to navigate life.
One kind of overarching interpretation of what life is.
Is a is a sort of punishment, um, in
order to make some of. Some of life's events
more intelligible, more legible to us, because if we
think of, if we navigate life as though it
was perhaps a place of reward, that it's a
kind of paradise and therefore of course that would
be incredibly naive, but there's elements of that view
in everyday psychology when we're kind of surprised. That
we aren't more happy and that there are, you
know, we're surprised that we're constantly being frustrated and
er we're constantly. Um, FACING adversity and things like
that, none of that is surprising if you think
of. The world not necessarily literally as a place
of punishment, although sometimes Schopenhauer comes close to that.
But as akin to it or structured like a
place of punishment. Um, LIKE an open air prison,
you know, um, and, and then in particular, so
he, he often talks about life as a kind
of its own hell, you know, that there's no
need for a kind of an infernal afterlife because
it's, we're already here, you know, we're already. Um,
YOU know, the, the crime, whatever it is that
we've committed and that, that means that we're here,
uh, is its own, is its own punishment, to,
to, to exist is the crime and to exist
is, is, is the punishment. So he uses, uh,
kind of overarching metaphor of punishment as one way
of understanding, making sense of what the world is
like, and, and, and it's not necessarily a comforting,
that's the thing, he. He doesn't think, one of
his kind of big principles is that we shouldn't
use comfort as a guide for making sense of
the world cos it's often going to misguide us.
Um, WE should use, you know, an imminent sense
of self, uh, a sense of, uh, making, making
sense. Um, SO we should, uh, try to opt
for those interpretations of the world that actually just
make all the pieces fit together, like solve the
jigsaw puzzle and. The puzzle is Much more coherently
solved if we think of the world as like
adversity being, and frustration being baked into it in
in the way that is the case with the
punishment, um, rather than it would, it's the world
becomes very confusing if we, if we think of
it as anything else really. So that's where the
metaphorical sense of sense of punishment comes in. Um,
AND sometimes he became specifically interested, like I've done
some work on Schopenhauer's views on solitary confinement, which
again, this is another, this is a really good
example of where looking at things in context is
important, because until the late 18th century, early 19th
century. Imprisonment was, was a kind of um, wasn't
itself a form of punishment, so you would imprison
somebody when they were, Awaiting punishment, and punishment would
be something like. You know, being pilloried or being
hanged or being fined if you're lucky, or, or
whatever, um, but imprisonment itself, just incapacitation of a
person, was not, of course it would be unpleasant,
it'd be something people would want to, it might
be function as a deterrent in itself, but it
wasn't considered a form of punishment. Now, in the
21st century, we consider all of those other things
I just mentioned inhumane, well, at least in any
kind of, Humane country Nevertheless, we tolerate imprisonment, we
just, we, we almost equate punishment with imprisonment. That's
when you say, you know, you might be punished,
you're, you're, you instantly think of being imprisoned. But
that's a, that's a historical development. Um, AND in
particular, being imprisoned on your own, so the form
of solitary confinement was a 19th century invention. And
that's something that again, Schopenhauer was, was obviously wise
to because there's traces of references to it in
his work and how he thought that was a,
A punishment that seemed more humane, that it was
moving away from these terrible. Overtly violent forms and
brutal forms of punishment, but he thought it was
very, like a, a secretly, a surreptitiously brutal, like
mentally, one of the most brutal forms of punishment,
you can find, and there he was actually, once
you tease that view out ahead of his time
because, or, or kind of at least aware of
how the times were moving, because now we are
very aware, and there are whole charity groups and
activists who um who watch um um. Keep a
watch out for instances of solitary confinement and and
human rights violations and things like that, so, so
yeah, so there's the, the literal theory of punishment
which is he's a deterrent deterrentist. There's the way
he uses the metaphor of punishment to articulate his
pessimism, and there's specific forms of punishment that show
that he was keeping abreast of the, of the
news of what's going on in the, in the
19th century world.
So earlier you mentioned how there's the suspicion that
his father might have committed suicide. So how did
Schopenhauer approach suicide philosophically?
Good, yeah, so, so. We're kind of nicely ordering
these things chronologically and that when they come back
after the Grand Tour, Schopenhauer's father. Is looking physically
and mentally unwell, and then um when Germanenhauer was
17. In 1805, his father is found dead in
the canal behind the family home in, in Hamburg.
Mhm. Um, AND although it's not public publicly announced
this way, the family, it seems, suspect, um, that
he died by suicide. Yeah, um, OK, so those
are the facts, and what, what's the philosophy? Well,
the philosophy's quite easy to state, um. So Schopenhauer
thinks that we have a right. To choose suicide.
That it's not immoral to take your own life.
However, He, he thinks we have a moral reason.
Not to choose suicide. So we have a right
to choose suicide, but we have a reason not
to. Um, IN other words, If we were to
commit suicide or choose suicide, we wouldn't be doing
anything morally wrong. But Schopenhauer thinks we have a
reason to kind of renounce that right, to never
actually activate it. Um, NOW, now just looking at
those views, I think that's quite a sensible stance.
Um, THESE days as well, like I think the
times have caught up with Schopenhauer is that we
take a much more, again in any kind of
civilized society, we take a much more sympathetic view
towards suicide. In Schopenhauer's day, again, looking at it
in context, one of the, I found this in
Al Alvarez's book A Savage God, one of the
best books on suicide. I think there is. Um,
HE mentions in passing in Danzig, which is where
the Schopenhauer family actually came from, um, before it
was annexed by Prussia. If somebody died by suicide
at home, they, they, it was, it was, you
know, outlawed to remove them by the front door,
they had to be kind of winched out of
the window. Who knows why, but it's these kind
of inhumane punishments that people inflict on, on a
corpse really, and then there was, there was all
kinds of things, people would do horrible things to
the corpses of, of, of, of people who'd chosen
suicide. Nowadays, you know, of course it's controversial and
it's, it's, it's painful, it's tragic, it's a sensitive
topic, but in general I think we, we take
a more sympathetic view towards, um, you know, people
who choose suicide or are considering suicide. Not just
out of practical reasons that it's actually maybe in
the interest of suicide prevention, that that means that
people don't become secretive and and all sorts of
things that might lead to suicide, but just on
the moral grounds that these people deserve our sympathy.
And they deserve respect and they deserve to be
treated with dignity even though um, well not even
though but you know it has nothing to do
with the fact that they're considering this. So I
think that the fact that Schopenhauer thinks there's a
right to suicide shows that he's. He's got a
more humane approach, but most of us, again, again,
not everyone, but, but a lot of people think,
OK, even though people who are contemplating suicide deserve
sympathy and respect and dignity, we still want to
discourage them, right, generally, um, you know, um, which
again might be surprising given Schopenhauer's pessimism, you might
think, well, if he thinks this is the right
suicide, why isn't he saying well we should all
end our lives as soon as possible. Yeah. Um,
AND we'll get to why he thinks that specifically,
but the idea that he thinks that it wouldn't
be wrong to do it, but still you shouldn't,
I think that chimes with most people, you know,
um, uh, I don't know, everyone, Schopenhauer makes his
point, probably everyone has been touched by suicide. Everyone
has a family member or a friend who either
has chosen that or, or has considered it. Um,
AND generally we'll kind of approach them with saying,
well, we want to respect their decision, but at
the same time we want to discourage them. So
now this is where it gets all very kind
of specific to Schopenhauer, which is that his reason
for discouraging suicide is quite unusual. So most of
us would give kind of maybe psychological grounds, say,
OK I know you feel desperate now, but give
it time, you'll feel better. I don't know what
the best kind of way to talk about this
is necessarily, but um we have, we might give
other reasons, probably not moral reasons, we wouldn't probably
try and discourage somebody by saying it would be
wrong for you to do that these days, we
would probably take a more psychological approach. Schopenhauer's view
is that the suffering that somebody, that leads somebody
to the point of want, you know, choosing suicide
might actually be a path to a genuine form
of escape. And this leads to a different kind
of a higher level of his philosophy which is,
um, the, the, the kind of ultimate solution to
the problem of suffering for Shobha is, is aesthetic.
Resignation of the kind you find in, in the
Buddha or in kind of Christ's crucifixion or, or
in, you know, monastic monkish, aesthetic life or the
or the kind of mystics of various world religions
and so on. Renunciation of the world and so
on, so he, he seems to think that like,
He, uh, one of the metaphors he uses is
that somebody who chooses suicide is like a person
who stops a painful operation halfway through, and therefore
never becomes cured. And, and, and this actually links
to his views on the idea of the, the
world as a place of punishment, and that this,
this suffering, like in a punishment, the suffering has
a purpose, um, uh, and, and he actually does
think that, I mean, again, he, it's hard to
know how literally he means this, but if there's
any purpose to suffering. It's, it's trying to tell
us this message that we, we need to renounce
the world or what have you. So it, it,
it would, it would almost never work as a
method of suicide prevention. If you would, if if
if somebody was saying I'm thinking of killing myself
and you said well hang on, if you stick
it out, maybe you'll achieve salvation through aesthetic resignation.
They'll probably go, what are you talking about? I,
you know, I, I, that's not gonna, that's not
keeping me hanging on by any means, you know.
And that makes me wonder whether Schopenhauer actually intended
his philosophy of suicide to, to, you know, for
that purpose. I don't think he's trying to talk
anybody off a ledge. I think he's trying to
give the philosophical grounds for um for forming an
evaluative judgment about the act of suicide from a
third party perspective, rather than a kind of second
person view where you're trying to actually say, You
know, you would probably take a different, more sensitive,
you know, route if you're actually trying to discourage
somebody from taking that choice.
He, he also wrote on the topic of madness.
I mean, did it play a specific role in
his life and what were his ideas on madness?
Yeah, I mean, one link we can, one immediate
link we can make here is that um it's
quite a specific one. But he, he thought that
character, this is where it's really tempting, really hard
not to look at Schopenhauer's life in the, er,
you know, look at Schopenhauer's life events and put
them side by side with his philosophy. But he
thought that character traits were inherited from the father.
Um, THERE were other sources saying these sorts of
things, um, so he's not completely creating something out
of thin air to suit his life events. But
he did find those sources, he, he kind of
had a motivation for finding those sources. And, and
one of the character traits he says, you know,
he, he's actually specifically interested in certain parts about
the descendants, the inheritance of mental disorders. And in
particular, um, mental disorders that might lead to suicide.
He says that suicide, the tendency to suicide, he
says, he actually says is the most heritable trait.
And again, you know, I'm trying to toe this
line here of not reading too much into the
ideas, too much of the life into the ideas,
but one does wonder whether Schopenhauer thought he might
have inherited a kind of, you know, um, mental
ill health from his father. Um, THAT'S something I
do kind of. You know, reference in the book
here and there. Um, BUT his actual theory of
madness is, is interesting in a few respects. I
mean, obviously madness, these days we wouldn't tend to
use that term. Obviously it's a, it's a not
a medical term, but that's the term that, or
the term that's translated Schopenhauer's using, um. And one
interesting thing is that when he was a, so
after he had left the family home to go
to university after his father's death with a bit
of negotiation with his mother who had gone on
to start her own career as a writer in
Weimar. When he's a student, as many students were
encouraged to go to visit, again in a very
19th century way that would be kind of, quite
inappropriate now unless you were a medical student. Go
and actually visit the asylum, the Berlin charity, the,
the wing, the psychiatric wing of their, their hospital.
And just look at the patients, you know, have
a nose around or what have you. But Schopenhauer
did that with a, way more of a, er,
stronger motivation which was that he was going to
lectures. Uh, FROM Vichter, one of the big post-Kantian
philosophers at the time, and Victor kind of casually
said that, you know, as part of his philosophy,
you know, he was saying that, um, genius is
divine, whereas madness is animal, and Schopenhauer was thinking
actually, he was sort of this kind of, again
slightly romanticized notion that genius and madness may have
gone hand in hand. And so he, he went
to visit these patients. With a more specific motive
of actually finding out the relationship like well, the,
the origins of madness and its relationship with, with
genius rather than um with kind of animal nature.
And so that's the, that's the kind of context.
um AND then the theory he comes up with.
It's again quite prescient because um in a way
that prefigures Freud, Schopenhauer um argues that basically madness
is a, is a um well he says it's
the torn thread of memory. So it's when we
kind of deliberately. Conceal facts about our personal history
from ourselves because they are threatening or humiliating or
traumatic. It's a theory of repression, he uses those
words. Um, AND because of so much of. Uh,
HEALTHY social and psychological function is to do with
knowing who you are. Right. Um, DISRUPTING our personal
histories in that way, um, has, you know, a
huge and general, er, dysfunctional effect on, on a
person. Um, SO, so yeah, so that's his, his
theory of madness, that madness is, um, it's basically
based on a theory of repression, and it's not
all purpose, it's something I don't mention in the
book is that like, he really must be thinking
of a certain kind of. Um, Mad person or
an insane person, person of bad ill health, um
because um, you know, men, disordered memory isn't gonna
explain every type of mental dysfunction, it's only gonna
explain a certain type of maybe, a certain type
of psychosis. Um, AND I wonder, this is very
speculative, but I wonder whether that's a kind of
artifact of his research method. In that Schopenhauer's theory
is based on. Patients who he could talk to.
And learn about their personal histories from, from them.
And then they would try to communicate their personal
histories to him, and they would be, you know,
all, you know, badly disordered. And he would, and
then he kind of drew the conclusion that oh
well they're. Their, you know, their madness must lie
in this disordered sense of their personal history. Um,
BUT you know, imagine all the patients he wasn't
speaking to, the ones who couldn't speak to him,
the catatonic ones in the corner, for instance, the
paranoid ones who, um, who were fearful of, of
a stranger. I don't know, I, I, you know,
but, um. Not that I discussed this in the
book, but I feel like his, his method was
in some ways quite limiting, um, and only gave
him a partial look into the nature of madness,
into a particular type of subject he could speak
to. Um, AND so I don't think his, his
theory, you know, ultimately generalizes, but it's still interesting
and we're still quite um. You know, quite prescient,
definitely predicted some elements of Freud.
Mhm. But why did Schopenhauer never marry? I mean,
was that something that derived also from his philosophy,
did he have something to say on the topic
of marriage as well?
Yeah, again, it's hard to know which way, um,
to order things because he definitely said things to
the effect that a true free thinker, going back
to this idea of self-reliance. Um, HE thought that
any kind of practical aims, practical imperatives might ultimately
distort. A person's ability to think freely, so if
you have to, if you have a, you know,
a wife and a family, um, and you have
to earn a living and so on, that might
incentivize you to, to taint, to distort your, your
philosophy so that it's, you know, er it gets
you a job and gets you um, sells your
books and things like that. So, um, you know,
he does seem to think that. A precondition of
being a free thinker is to be somewhat of
a, of an outsider also in the sense of
like avoiding kind of bourgeois, you know, middle class
family life and so on, it's again hard to
know whether that's a a a a kind of,
Retrospective rationalization, um, but it's true that he never
did marry, um, he did have a, somewhat, you
know, an active sex life, there is, there is
evidence of that from the way he talks about
his life events and the way that some people
talk about him, um, so he wasn't, you know,
monkish in that, in that respect. Um, BUT, um,
and then, you know, the, the answer to the
question why you never could just be married, answered
biographically rather rather than philosophically that he was. It
wasn't just that he found people difficult to be
around, people found it difficult to be around him,
he, he would not have been an easy man
to marry, I think, and um, and I often
think that, you know, there's, there's a way of
looking at him. Um, WHERE he's, he's, he's, um,
I don't know, some kind of failure or something
like that, that he failed to, to, to get
married. But the other way to look at it
is that it's, it's in some way a kind
of a mercy, it's, um. It's only fair that
he didn't impose. Himself on any other person to
that degree of intimacy because it would have been
hard to be married to Gopinha, like if you
read the biographies of, you know, great men, there's
a few who who had good marriages, like, the
few that spring to mind are John Stuart Mill,
and well, his eventual relationship with Harriet Taylor seemed
to be, he seemed to be a good, Um,
partner, um, for especially by the standards of his
time, and I think Charles Darwin as well, from
reading a biography, a big biography of Darwin, you
get the impression he was a, he was a
decent man and a decent family man. Yeah, OK,
so those are some positive examples, but then you
look at Marx and Hegel, and, and you look
at, I mean Schopenhauer had misbegotten children, you know.
Children with women he wasn't married to, but Marx
and Hegel had children with women they weren't married
to, while they were married to other women, and
these other women who they were married to were
expected to kind of, maintain the man and so
that they could go on to, you know, Chernow
could have made a different point, which was that,
He, he, he sort of suggests that in order
to be a free thinker, he needs to not
have a wife, not to be tied down to
a wife or whatever. But lots of men saw
it the other way around, which is that in
order to be a free thinker they needed a
caretaker, who they would marry, you know, there are
books about these subjects like. Uh, Anna Funder's book,
uh, Wifeom, which looks at, um, You know, er,
George Orwell's, um, wife, um, and. Uh, AND how
they're basically treated as additional servants and support and
things like that, so. I don't know what I'm
what point I'm going for here, which might be
that it was kind of um there's something that's
slightly noble rather than a failure about Schopenhauer's not
marrying. Um, WHEN you look at the the, the
ignoble ways that other men of the 19th century
treated, treated their wives, so it's probably a good
thing that he didn't marry.
So, but that's on the topic of marriage. What
about more generally, uh, love? I mean, what worries,
thoughts on love?
Good, um, so if we're talking about romantic love,
because we might want to distinguish between romantic love,
um, sexual love, on the one hand, and moral
love, or or which to Schopenhauer would be compassionate
love, and he's um he's very uncynical about moral
and compassionate love, in fact his whole moral philosophy
is based on, The possibility and actuality of, of
genuinely compassionate love between, not just between intimate friends
but also between strangers and things like that. Putting
that aside and thinking about romantic love, there he's
more, he characters, characterizes his view as realistic. Erring
towards the cynical, you know, in that he thinks
that romantic love is this kind of. Disguise that
the drive to procreate, wears in order to coax
individuals into this kind of absurd, um merry go
round of, The rebirth and renewing a new generation
of human beings who are only gonna suffer, you
know, so the, the pessimism is there in the,
in the background of that as well. Um, SO
yeah, so that, that's another view that can be
summarized quite, quite succinctly, which is that he thinks
that. Romantic love, sexual love is a delusion that
masks the drive to procreate and ultimately all love
is rooted in the sex drive, he's pretty, he's
pretty clear about that. Having said that, he, you
know, he thinks that that explains a lot because
rather than giving, making that, you know, by calling
it a delusion that might seem like he's making
romantic love a kind of thin veil, you know,
that it's, that it's really nothing. Uh, THAT it's
all appearance. But he's actually going for the opposite
point, which is he's trying to add depth and
urgency to romantic love. He's trying to explain why
this thing is something that people will do incredibly
irrational things for the sake of, you know. If
two star-crossed lovers can't be together, they might both
end up, you know, dead, trying to, trying to
be together and failing. Or the lengths people will
go to to um to get this partner who,
from an outside perspective looks indistinguishable like. From anybody
else, like why is this person pursuing that person
so doggedly. When they could probably get the same
thing if they're a bit more open-minded out of,
you know, thousands of other people in the population
or what have you. So, it's a kind of
interesting problem why, why, why does, why is love
pursued with such urgency, and it's, he thinks it's
because, Um, because there is more to it than
just the, uh, there's more to it than what
it appears, um, and, and. The, the, the kind
of additional depth or or heft to it is
this, um really important um, Function of, Producing and
perfecting, because he has a, you know, view about
what makes two people attracted, which is that they
kind of equalize each other's qualities, which can go
in a slightly dodgy eugenics direction, but ultimately they,
they are, um, serving a kind of really deep
and profound purpose, um, and so, what's driving them
is something that's, that, that it's very high stakes,
um, that they, they've been tasked with quite an
important goal. And that would explain why what on
the surface might seem like quite a frivolous and
superficial and irrational pursuit is actually something that's er
that's really quite urgent and serious. So he's trying
to, yeah, he's trying to explain that problem.
Uh, SO you mentioned that he probably wouldn't have
been a great partner also in part due to
his own views on women. So what were his
views on women and were they the typical views
of 1/19 century man, or
what? Yeah, in some respects, yeah, so this is,
this is. One of the more regrettable parts of
Schopenhauer, one of the things, one of the negative
character traits he's, he's, he's best known for, which
is that he was an out and out misogynist.
Like he wasn't even trying to hide it. He
really did think that women were in, in most
respects inferior to men. And that's, you know, in
some, in some ways just an irredeemably. Retrograde view
and, and it wasn't even as if he was
simply a man of his times, he was worse
than a man of his times in that respect
because, by the mid-nineteenth century, you know, I've mentioned
John Stuart Mill for instance, who's um, who's a,
who's who's born, you know, after, After Schopenhauer was
born, but still is living in the same, roughly
the same 19th century world and and just look
at how more advanced Mills's views on women were
compared to Schopenhauer, even if, even if Mills weren't
views weren't perfect either. So Schopenhauer could have known
better, and in other areas of sort of social
importance, he did know better, he knew better about
treatment of animals, he knew better about um, you
know, the treatment of other human groups, in particular,
you know, he was, I mentioned in the book
that he was, he kept an eye on what
was going on with the um. Transatlantic slave trade
and was appalled by it. So, um, so we
can't, we can't just assume, you know, we can't
just say oh he was a man of his
times, he, he, like I said, he was worse
than a man of his times. But can we
say anything positive? Um, WELL, well, here is, you
know, some things I've discussed in the book actually
come from the research of other people who've looked
into Schopenhauer's views on women and found that. That
he has, his views on women have this kind
of ironic afterlife. In the views of early feminist
philosophers, um, and so actually, you know, this is
where it gets, Quite complicated, but the generation, talking,
keep coming back to Mill, I don't talk about
Mill that much in the book actually, I mentioned
that once in, in a different context, but for
some reason it's on my mind today and um
the generation after Mill, the kind of late 19th
century Britain, there was a kind of collection of,
you know, there was quite a lot of free
thinkers who were trying to think about new ways
of, of living, were really impressed by Mill's kind
of liberalism and. You know, taking it in the
different directions, particularly around sexuality and, and, and um.
And ways to, you know, have relationships and things
like that. And gender as well and and and
the and the the idea of the new woman
and so on. And Schopenhauer was being read by
these people and taken seriously and and and maybe
they were just trying to, you know, turn a
blind eye to the stuff that was out and
out misogynist. But, but Chebna did raise question marks
about whether. Um, WHETHER the version of womanhood that
gave women their liberty was a version of womanhood
that fitted for all women. So in particular, um,
the version of womanhood that gave women their liberty
was a married woman, or a woman who had
married prospects, which is. At the time very heteronormative
given that there was no kind of marriage equality,
um, but also, you know, it would limit women
who wanted those kinds of um freedoms, they would
have to seek marriage and the women who didn't
want to seek marriage or couldn't for whatever reason
were left in a very vulnerable position, you know,
and again you can think about this somewhat biographically
in that Schopenhauer's mother was a widow. And his
sister, never married, was a so-called spinster, you know,
not a very nice term, I don't think, but,
and you can think of other women too where
marriage just isn't part of their lives or what
have you. What do you do for those women?
ER what happens to those women? Schopenhauer thinks that
they are often um they often have to seek
quite difficult labor, sometimes sex work for the, for
lower class women generally, um, or, or, or they
are kind of. They don't have a way of
a foothold in exerting any influence on society, um,
and you know, to a, you know, to a
feminist, that might be quite interesting, that that raises
interesting questions about maybe we do need to reconsider
the type of, you know, our conception of womanhood.
And the conditions of equality and liberty. Um, AND,
and in particular the institution of marriage, which Schopenhauer
was, he did think that monogamous marriage was unnatural
and he goes into all these views about like
how he he advocates polygamy and stuff like that,
which starts to get a bit. A little bit
dodgy again, um, but still. It's ironic and interesting
that Schopenhauer's for being such a sexist and a
misogynist, he actually had this, he was read seriously
by um by first wave feminist thinkers.
But on the topic of gender, I mean, what
did they have to say about it and the
understanding of gender that people had back in the
19th century, was it similar to ours in the
sense that we separate sex from gender or no?
Uh, THAT'S a good question. So, so I do,
um. That is a good question because on the
one hand I wanna say that. Um, THE separation
of sex and gender is a, is a development
that, that comes out later in the history of,
you know, feminist philosophy, may, maybe with the, the
second wave of it with, with, with Beauvoir and,
and saying about becoming a woman and so on.
You know Beauvoir was a reader of Schopenhauer too.
Um, AS I mentioned in the book, some people
think that she may have got the title of
The Second Sex from Schopenhauer's essay on women, even
though it's a classical reference that goes back even
further. Um, SO I don't know whether Termina doesn't
seem to be focused on that, although he, he
must have known. About gender indeterminacy. Uh, AND sexual
indeterminacy. So for instance, um if I, I can't
remember why I was looking at this, in fact
I think it was, so this is quite a
specific, this is quite um a niche thing, but.
Um, Shermanner had interesting views on race, or at
least what I thought were interesting views on race
in that he didn't think that, um, whiteness was
natural. He, he, he even says there's no such
thing as a white race. He thinks that all
human beings ultimately, the, uh, the first human beings
would have had dark skin, um, er, which is
actually borne out by the scientific facts now with
the kind of theory of, um, evolutionary anthropology that
we have now. But he wasn't really, um, thinking
of that, but anyway. It turns out that that
wasn't actually a, you know, terribly radical view, in
fact, one of Schopenhauer's teachers, um. Blumenbach, who, who,
um, was an early race theorist, had a similar
degenerativist view, the idea that, um, The human race
starts out with darker skin and then it becomes
kind of bleached as it, you know, moves between
different climates and civilisations or what have you. But
I went back and you might be wondering what's
this got to do with gender. I, I, I
was kind of, he did actually Schopenhauer studied under
Blumenbach at Gottingen University where, where, where Schopenhauer went
before he went to Berlin. So I went back
and looked at his notes on taking Blumenbach's class.
I wondered whether he, Blumenbach talked about race in
the classes. Now, I can't see Blumenbach talking about
race, but, Bloombach does talk about um human sexual
tastes and talks about um a particular statue in,
I know I can't remember which culture he's talking
about, but basically it's a, it's a presentation of
human beauty that has male and female sexual uh
you know, um, organs. Um, SO it has breasts,
but it also has a penis, um. And, and,
and he, Sherman now knew that um. Ancient human
cultures. Didn't necessarily. Have a conception of human physical
beauty that was um kind of um, Had a
kind of binary gender, um, so I know that's
a very kind of specific, Point to pick up
on, but, but, but I just think Chernhower was
so aware of the way that he, particularly around
sexuality, marriage, sexuality, marriage, he was so aware that
this, these are historical things, that sexuality has been
very different over time, that marriage has been very
different over time. Um, THAT I can't help but
wonder that he, you know, when, when he's talking
about. The 19th century concept of womanhood that gave
a certain subgroup of women. Liberty and equality, I
can't help but wondering whether, you know, he's got
at least the right ingredients to realize that the
concept of gender itself changes over time. Um, AND
that a woman in 19th century Europe is, is
kind of classified under a different idea than let's
say, a woman in East Asia, in, in the
kind of, you know. Um, IN the, in its
classical period or what have you, so although he
doesn't put his finger on that, I, I think
he's, He's actually more historical about concepts that people
give him credit for.
Interesting. So uh you said earlier that contrary to
some common misconceptions, he did have an active sex
life, so what did he write on the topic
of sexuality, what were his thoughts on it?
Yeah, well, so, so we've already mentioned that he
thinks that sex is ultimately, you know, sexual love
is ultimately driven by um sexual desire. Um, AND
the desire in particular to procreate, which gives his
obviously a kind of very heteronormative as we'd say,
model. Um, BUT he, this is again an instance
of where he's, he's clearly a historically literate. You
know, student of sexuality in that he realizes that
there are, there have been throughout history forms of
sexuality that do not follow this pattern of um,
You know, uh, procreation, in particular, um, he's thinking
of same-sex relationships, so why is it that same-sex
relationships, or at least certain kinds of same-sex relationships
are found in every culture. In every part of
history, in every part of the world, there will
be same-sex partners, um. How, how is that happening
if sexuality is all about procreation given that, you
know, um, generally same-sex partners er can't procreate, um,
naturally with one another, um. And um and so
he tries to develop a solution to that which
is again a little bit dodgy because firstly he
makes a lot, a bunch of assumptions. He, he,
his, his model of same-sex relationships is what what
is now what what was then called pederasty, which
is today can be used as a slur, you
know, you can, you can call someone a pederas
and you use that in a homophobic way. Um,
BUT to him it just meant the, the kind
of classic Greek model, which actually talking about classic
Greek models was a way that sometimes some of
these free thinkers towards the end of the 19th
century could, could even begin to talk about same-sex
relationships in public by kind of borrowing some of
the. Eridition and the prestige of, you know, being
a classical scholar, so you can, you're kind of
studying it, You know, you, you could only really
maybe study these, these sorts of um verboten sexualities
by studying them medically or studying them classically. Um,
AND so Schopenhauer's kind of doing that too by
saying, look, in ancient Greece and ancient Rome, men
would have sex with each other all the time,
and they wouldn't have to necessarily hide it even,
that it might be vener a venerable tradition. And
generally it was an age differentiated sexuality, it would
be boys and men. And that gave Schopenhauer a
foothold in finding a solution, which is that he
thinks that. These sorts of, this particular form of
same-sex relationship develops because it's undermature, sexually undermature, reproductively
under mature men. Having sex with reproductively overmature men,
so they are still serving nature's goal of producing
fit offspring, but negatively by avoiding, producing unfit offspring,
which by today's standard is a crazy way to
think about it, but. By the standards of the
time, it's interesting that he's even publishing this, like
this is, this is not in a private notebook,
this is in the last version of his, of
his main works. So it's public, and he knew
he was taking a risk by talking about it
that way. There are some scholars who try to,
I think this is going too far, retrospectively kind
of read this as evidence that Schopenhauer himself may
have had um. May have been gay or bisexual
or something like that, um, I think that's going
a bit too far cos there's nothing really in
the sources to bear that out, but then why
would there be, you know, another parallel going back
to the utilitarians would be Bentham, who wrote about
in defense of same-sex relationships, um, and there's a
stronger case to be made there that was personal
to him. Um, BUT you wouldn't leave evidence lying
about, so it's, it's a, it's a difficult, you
know, thing to answer. But, uh, again, so that's
another example we're, we're, we're finding, something I was
surprised to find is that Schopenhauer is very historical.
Um, HE, he, and this, this goes back to
the, uh, the, the one, an idea we talked
about earlier which is thinking for yourself. Like he
wasn't just gonna take the idea that, so in
the 19th century, he could have got by on
just saying, well. Same-sex relationships are abhorrent because they're
an offense to procreation. You know, he could have
just dogmatically asserted that and, and, and nobody would
have really challenged him. But instead he realizes actually
that, that is just dogma, because if you look
at the world, you find it can't just be
all about procreation, or at least it's not as
straightforward as that, because look, the, the world is
telling you that, that, that um. That same-sex relationships
are happening everywhere, so what are we to make
of that, so it goes back to this idea
if you really wanted to um. Make sure that
his observations were grounded in a in a in
a honest study of the world. Yeah.
So if I remember correctly and if I understand
it correctly, and if not, please correct me, but.
Um, WHEN it comes to his ethics and how
he derived it from, what he derived it from,
I mean, I think it has to do at
least to some extent with his metaphysics having to
do with the will and how the will then
eventually leads to suffering. So I mean, is that
correct and what were his ethics
exactly? Good, yeah, so. So There's two ideas really
here. Um, ONE is, um, his idea of kind
of morality as compassion. So when we, when somebody
does some kind of generally an interpersonal uh moral
action, whether it's of an of an omission, so
where I refrain from er interfering with somebody or
whether it's uh you know, action or commission where
I aid somebody, his understanding of that, um. Of
that relationship is based, squarely and exclusively on the
idea of compassion, where compassion is being incentivized by
somebody else's suffering to, to, to help or, or
you know, or to not harm them. So that's
one idea that he thinks that morality is based
on compassion, as distinct from say utility or duty,
so he's he's he's um he's not a utilitarian,
he's not a deontologist. Some people argue he's some
form of virtue ethicist, although even then he would,
he would be an unconventional sort. Um, HE'S more
in the lineage, he, he knows his history, he
knows that maybe Rousseau is the, is the, is
the most recent prominent precursor to this cos Rousseau,
in contrast to Hobbes, thinks that human nature has
a kind of innate pity, and innate, you know,
fellow feeling for one another. So that's his kind
of philosophy of morality, let's say. And then I've
already mentioned that he has this higher ethical stance
of salvation, which is more to do, less to
do with like aiding others or not harming others
and more to do with achieving a kind of
escape from life's suffering, the, the kind of suffering
that's in, that's the kind of subject matter of
his, of his pessimism. Yeah. And so um and
so yeah, there's this other side of his ethics
too, where, where he advocates asceticism rather than compassionate
action. Um, AND you might, so in these respects
he's very similar to the, the Buddhist philosophies that
he was very inspired by, like one thing that
I haven't mentioned too much, although there's been hints
is that he was from, you know, um. From
the earliest works he was producing, he was literate
in classical Indian philosophy, um, both its ethics and
it's metaphysics, and sometimes he was a bit, Idiosyncratic
in his reading of these sources, I don't know
whether he'd necessarily pass muster with today's, you know,
scholars of these religions and these philosophies, um, but
you can see the resemblance there that, that one
of the, you know, his kind of primary moral
virtue is compassion, and, um, the form of salvation
that he advocates comes uh in, in the form
of a, Resignation and a and a um. And
a um and a negation of, of er of
desire, um, including sexual desire for instance, so all
that stuff we've been talking about sexuality, that would
be undone by achieving salvation.
So let's talk now about the later stages of
his life, particularly what was the impact of the
publishing of Perega and Perelli Pomana on his life
and how did he deal with, uh, the southern
fame ego. Yeah,
good, um, so yeah, so that's the standard, yeah,
story which I more or less stick to, which
is that, um, he doesn't become. Known until the
1850s, which is the last decade of his life
because he dies in 1860. In that time, um,
so all through from, from, you know, from childhood
to into his sixties, he has been, um, producing
work, he, he, he's always writing in his notebooks,
he's, you know, he has a very strict and
disciplined writing routine, so he's always working on philosophy,
but he's not publishing all the time. Um, YOU
know, the 1830s, for instance, yeah, I mean he
maybe puts out like re-editions of certain works, but
he doesn't publish any new works in the 1830s.
Um, YOU know, again, there's a nice historical contrast
there which is that a lot of the philosophers
of his day would have been writing in. In
journals and magazines as well as, you know, in
order to kind of help support their living, but
also to help kind of raise their profile and
stuff, but Schopenhauer has long gaps between publishing works
and none of them really capture much attention critically
or with the public. Um, INCLUDING works like The
Worlds and Representation, The Two Fundamental Problems of Ethics,
um, on Vision and Colors, which he writes with
Goethe on, on Goethe's kind of unusual theory of
color, on the will and nature, and his first
book on the fourfold root of the principle of
sufficient Reason, which is his doctoral dissertation. All of
these are kind of met with silence, and to
the point where he begins to think there's something
more to it, he becomes quite conspiratorial, I think,
sort of, sort of thinks that, or conspiracist sort
of thinks that maybe his views are too hot
and the public can't take them and the and
the philosophy professors are starting to um suppress them.
So he writes this last book in 1851 and
publishes it in 1851, which kind of actually gathers,
if you look in his notes, you know, he's
been writing some of these ideas for decades, but
um. In Peregri and Palopomina, which is additions and
omissions or offshoots and offcuts, um, it's these kind
of more occasional, more accessible, more worldly, more outward
looking version of Schopenhauer, slightly slightly less systematic, a
bit more, uh, dilettantic in the best possible sense
that he's sort of dipping into everything from noises
to Sanskrit literature, and he's got views on suicide
and this way we find the essay on women
and things like that, and then he's kind of
rehearsing some of his views on. The history of
philosophy and on suffering and things, and finally, um,
a review gets published in 1853. In, in the
Westminster Review. Now this was an organ and this
was a journal. I've been, I didn't mean to
talk so much about British culture, but that was
edited by John Stewart, founded by Bentham, edited by
John Stuart Mill. So Schopenhauer gets actually taken on
by radical liberal thinkers in the, in the UK
which he would have been happy with because he
loved the UK, he was an Anglophone ever since
the trip he made with his parents. Um, AND
this starts to bring him fame and renown. Suddenly
people realize, oh, there's this, there's this 60, 70
year old philosopher in Frankfurt who's been writing about
these most profound. Um, ASPECTS of the human condition
for decades, and nobody's been talking about him and
suddenly he gets this level of fame where people
want to paint portraits of him, take his photo,
I talk in the book a lot about Schopenhauer's
experiences with the birth of photography. Um, I, I
kind of wager that he might be the first
major philosopher to be, to be photographed. He must
have been certainly very close to being the first,
cause he gets photographed in the early 1840s, which
is only just after the, the most early forms
of portrait photography have been, uh, you know, publicized.
Um, AND yeah, he, he likes the fame, and,
and again he sort of starts to give it
a rationalization which is that actually this is the
right kind of fame, which is, it's not a
kind of quick fame that burns out. Um, HE,
uh, but it's the kind of fame that is,
that has, you know, that is backed by all
the decades of work he's been doing, like he
thinks he's famous for the right reasons. That he
hasn't tried to pander to the public, in fact,
he's actively tried to avoid pandering to the public,
he's just been diligently working on what he thinks
is true, and finally, the times have caught up
with him. Um, THERE'S an alternative explanation that some
people go for, so the, the, the Marxist philosopher
George Lukas. Um, ARGUES that it's actually because of
the 1848, the, you know, failed revolutions in, in
Europe. And that actually Europe was going through a
quite pessimistic period and Schopenhauer was then taken onto
the, into the mainstream because he was kind of
giving voice to the doom and gloom and Schopenhauer
resisted that interpretation as well, um, but that's an
alternative, that it wasn't really anything to do with
Schopenhauer himself so much as, um, the mood of
pessimism that was kind of, Uh, lurking around Europe
in those days. Um, BUT yeah, he was, he
was pretty grateful even though it did mean that
the attention, like people were knocking on his door
and trying to visit him and things like that,
and some of them he kind of greets kindly,
um, depending on what their motives are for seeking
him out, and some of them he's a bit
gruff, so there's always that. That solitary nature that
we started our conversation with is, is, is bumping
up against this, um, launch into the world, yeah.
OK, but at a certain point there you said
that he fought, he became famous for the right
reasons, but what would be the wrong reasons, I
mean, what else did he have to say on
the topic of fame?
Yeah, good, well, the wrong reasons would basically be
um. If somebody had um, OK, so if somebody
was famous for. Let's say. There were, there were
certain philosophers, I mean it's, it's hard not to
bring up Hegel again because he's an example that
Schopenhauer often returns to, um, who he thought that
the, that the public had been fooled into thinking
that Hegel, not just that what Hegel was saying
was right, but that Hegel had anything to say.
Again, like lots of Hague aliens will be holding
their head in their hands saying Schopenhauer just. Got
Hegel totally wrong, but, but it's, it, it, we're
looking really at what Sherenhauer thought here rather than
what er what Hagel thought, Terenhower thought that Hegel
had nothing to say but he was saying it
anyway. And um that he thought was the wrong
kind of fame and we might think that I
mean it's the accusation often made, you know, an
insult often thrown from one philosopher to another who
when they think, you know, so Jacques Derrida famously
got kind of treated this way by a lot
of people and Foucault gets treated away a lot
by by um treated this way by a lot
of people where. Um, WHERE really there's no substance
to what they're saying, and Trevor I thought that
there was a lot of people who'd found fame,
purely because of just public perception of them being
a brilliant philosopher when there really wasn't any substance
to it. And there's, there's there's, there's there's, there
are certain philosophers who, who, you know, he thinks
might have deliberately engineered that, that they weren't doing
that in false consciousness, like it's not that they
thought they were saying something and they actually weren't,
but actually they were kind of willing to bend
their philosophy to just to kind of, they were
incentivized to, um, to meet with public approval, cos
you, you've got to remember that like um, With
different academic disciplines or different intellectual disciplines. There are
more objective ways to judge its success, so Schopenhauer
is particularly reverential of the sciences because you can
prove a scientific hypothesis and it of course we
do have, you know, peer reviewing who check the
method and the results and replication and things like
that, but ultimately there is a, the method is
ultimately, you know, sovereign in those disciplines. With philosophy,
it's not like that in that we, we, we,
the, the, the method we have. Is determined by
peer perceptions, um, and so if you can influence
those peer perceptions. In a way that's not to
do with actually producing, you know, true philosophy, but
just by, I don't know, appealing to tastes, inclinations,
agendas and so on, then you might win that
public and peer approval. Even though your philosophy is
is empty. So, so that's the, that's the thing,
Trevor now thought that his philosophy. Had got the
recognition it deserves, because it deserved to be recognized,
because it was true, because it was wise, cos
it was knowledge. But you could win that recognition.
By means of other things, and too many people
he thought had won that recognition by, Um, or
treated winning that recognition as an end in itself,
as if it could be detached from saying what's,
what's true and what's, what's honest and what's wise.
That's the kind of fame he thought was wrong
and would ultimately be shown to be a farce.
So he did expect Hegel to just descend into
oblivion, which he did for a bit, but then
Hegel was revived, and now he's going strong. Same
for Schopenhauer really, fame tends to fluctuate, but. He,
he kind of hoped and thought his fame would
last because it was based on a solid philosophical
footing, whereas these other philosophers who just sought fame
for its own sake, he thought ultimately people would
see that it's based on nothing and those philosophers
would disappear.
So just before we explore the end of his
life and his legacy, there's another topic I would
like to talk about here. So Uh, of course,
when we think about Schopenhauer, uh, we tend to
think about his metaphysics, his ethics, his aesthetics, and
some of the other topics we talked about today.
But what about politics? Did he have much to
say on the topic of politics because we don't
tend to think about Schopenhauer as a political philosopher
at all,
right? No, you're right, we don't, and, and, um.
So he does have things to say about politics.
Um, HE has a political philosophy. It doesn't take
up a significant, a substantial part of his philosophy,
it's a few sections of um the world as
a representation, and there's an essay or two in,
Perega and Palapometer that's on politics and jurisprudence, he's
not, he's certainly not um, There's a good reason
why he isn't known as a political philosopher, cos
he doesn't spend that much time doing actual political
philosophy. Although as we've mentioned, I mean, we've been
talking about his views on sexuality, I've mentioned his
views on race and, and gender, and we've been
talking about his, I mentioned in passing his views
on animals and on the international slave trade. These
are political issues, right? It's the thing is that.
It might have been a, you know, there are
people, scholars who've argued that perhaps by confining his
political philosophy in a very concentrated area, he was
sending the message that um the actual kind of
political philosophy, you know, er in the proper sense
is relatively limited in terms of addressing the, the
problems of pessimism, because even if you have a
ideally organized society. All these perennial existential horrors and
terrors are still gonna be there. Politics can't get
to the root of the human condition for Schopenhauer,
and that's why his political philosophy is confined to
such a concentrated and and limited place, but, If
you look outside that, you find politics in a
broader sense, um of the way that um. The
politic, you know, political mismanagement, you know, for instance,
the way that animals for centuries in Europe and
still to this day are going without certain essential
protections can add to the general quantity of misery
in the world. Similarly with the conditions of women,
similarly with the conditions of um people of other
races or, you know, other to the society that
they're in. Um, SO, so I think Charna has
actually a deeply political character even though. Kind of
maybe deliberately, he um he confines actual political philosophy
within very strict limits cos he, he's not hopeful
that politics will get to the root of our,
of our condition. People have started to write about
this, there's a very good book by Jacob Norberg,
who works at Duke University called Schopenhau Politics, that's
probably, that's definitely the most recent full length monograph
on Schopenhau politics and makes some of the points
that I've just mentioned. I've written a little about,
a little bit about Schopenhauer's politics. Um, But I,
I, I, I think it's more interesting to look
at the way that Schopenhauer applied his general philosophy
to political issues and looked at them, so for
instance, in the case of animals. He's talking about
what is a political issue, but he's using it
in a way to talk about his philosophy of
compassion, for instance, because he thinks that um animals
have, have not been treated as proper moral patients,
you know, some, you know, beings that deserve genuine
and direct moral treatment, and he thinks with his
philosophy of compassion that that's wrong because there's no
reason why a being that suffers like an animal
shouldn't deserve our compassion in, in exactly the same
way. As a, as a, as a human being,
so he often looks at political issues, he just
doesn't necessarily look at them like a political philosopher.
Mhm. So when and how did he die, and
I mean, do you think he would have been
satisfied with his own death? What were his more
general ideas on the topic of death?
Good. Um, OK, so he dies on the 21st
of September. 1860. He dies at home in his
in his adoptive home city of Frankfurt, where he's
lived for 2 or 3 decades. Um, HE dies
of probably something like a pulmonary pulmonary embolism, some
sort of respiratory cardiovascular respiratory condition, cos he's suffered
with shortness of breath. Um, PROBABLY that was the
death he wanted in the sense of he really
had a terror, a horror of losing his cognitive
faculties like Kant did. So he would have much
rather go relatively quickly to a physical illness. Than
for instance a long drawn out kind of neurological
disease, that would have been his, his absolute nightmare.
So in that sense, that was the death that
he wanted. He was also by then well known,
he could see the, the beginning, the dawn of
his fame across Europe. That's another tick, like he
would have been happy with going out on that
note. Actually, on the other hand, another way to
look at that is that he's kind of disappointed
that he's only just, just enjoying the success that
that, you know, he's just tasting the fruits of
his labor, of his decades of labor. So in
that sense he's a little bit eager for more
life, you know, there's one reflection that a friend
of his. Um, RIGHTS to, to, to say that
he, he, Sherman and I was saying, oh I
could live to 90 and then I'll really see
off the professorial class of philosophers, like, um, he
wanted to, to see his fame grow and grow
and to kind of lean into it and really
start to demolish academic philosophy in German universities. He
doesn't get that far because he only dies at
72, he doesn't get into his, into his 90s.
So at that point he's lusting maybe for a
little more life, which is kind of ironic in
where we started, given that he, he's a pessimist,
he thinks that, you know, um, life is a
mistake. So, so it's actually um ironic how I
actually think that Schopenhauer was in a good place
when he died. Um, HE had people who respected
his work, who were willing to help him to
publicize it. Um, HE lived, you know, he, you
know, in the first half of his life he
was moving around all the time. He barely left
Frankfurt in the last two decades, so I actually
think, you know. He was, he was happy, which
is an odd thing to say about Schopenhauer. Anyway,
so those are the, those are the biographical facts
and then um, the philosophy is an interesting one,
so. So Schopenhauer kind of picks up the tradition
of the philosophy of death whereby the goal is
not only to describe what death is in philosophical
terms, but also perhaps to provide some consolation for
the fact of death, you know. Um, OF course
Schopenhauer, you know, as a kind of matter of
principle, isn't going to let the consolatory goal. Distort
the the kind of descriptive one, so he's not
gonna give you, he's not gonna describe death in
a way that's, um, you know, at all costs
must give consolation cos that would be wrong, you
know, his ultimate value is truth and honesty, so
if it turns out that he can't give a
consolatory description of death, well too bad, you know,
um, he, you know, honesty is, is, is, is
important to Chopin above all, but he recognizes that
ever since Socrates, philosophy, philosophers have. Uh, LINKED the
motive to do philosophy with the fear of mortality.
And that maybe becoming a philosopher is one way
of coming to terms with the fact of our,
you know, of our deaths and things like that.
So, um, so, so the question then is how
does he go about that, well. One version of
uh of this philosophy would be the kind of
epicurean stance which is that death is not something
to be feared of, it's not something we should
be afraid of because um, you know, it's not
something that really happens to us, we'll we'll, you
know, we'll be dead, um we shouldn't worry about
it because we won't, we won't be here to,
to, um, To er to experience it, and some
people might be able to take consolation from that,
although others might be like, well that's exactly what
I'm afraid of, there's a, there's a poem by
Philip Larkin called Oba, where he, it's one of
the best poems I know about the fear of
death and, and he, you know, Larkin, you know,
kind of belies this epicurean Epicurean argument by saying,
oh like not being able to think, not being
able to talk, not being able to write, uh
you, you know, you tell me that's consolation, well
that's exactly what I'm afraid of, um. The other,
the other um option is, is personal immortality. So,
OK, er don't be afraid of death because actually
death is an illusion, the essential part of yourself,
which many people locate in the conscious mind, the
living, breathing, thinking part of ourselves, that will go
on eternally after death, that's consolation for some. Um,
Schopenhauer thinks that's foolish. He thinks, um, one thing
the Epicurean has right is the idea that, um,
death is the extinguish extinguishing of the individual, that
the conscious, consciousness, individual consciousness doesn't survive death according
to Schopenha, that's just wishful thinking. So what, what,
so, so what does he actually think? He kind
of has a blend of these two views in
that he, he. On the one hand Um On
the one hand, he, he thinks that individual consciousness
is er eliminated in death, so that is annihilated,
but on the other, he doesn't think that our
essence, the essence of the human being is annihilated
in death. So he kind of has a mixture
of the annihilationist view and the the immortalist view.
Um, BUT then the question arises, well, what is
it, what is it about the essence of human
beings that survives? Well, it's kind of for sure
now the impersonal part of, of, of, of our
essence because something we haven't really teased out in
his theoretical philosophy is that he thinks that all
human beings are just manifestations of what he calls
the will to life, um, or the, the will
to life is a manifestation of some wider metaphysical
reality that is, you know, maybe some at bottom
somewhat mysterious. Um, AND so, so there is some
kind of, um, ultimately each human being is never
really, the essence of each human being is never
really born in the first place. There was, there's
a part of each human being, it's part of
every, you know, existent thing that existed before it
and will go on to exist after it, so.
To, to kind of take any consolation in the,
or to take or to take uh the fear
out of death, we have to kind of, it
involves a kind of transformation of consciousness or a
or a shift in perspective, whereby we don't identify,
we don't locate our identity in the individual consciousness
that actually does, as a matter of fact, die.
But we locate our identity in something deeper that
has been around before us and will go on
after us. Now, a lot of people won't take
consolation in that, right, they'll be like, no, the
bit that you're saying is going to die is
the bit I want, you know, at all costs
to survive. Forch now that's a no hope view.
He thinks look, nobody's going to be able to
consolate, if you fixate on that, you're always going
to be afraid. So too bad if you can't,
and actually he thinks that maybe a certain kind
of moral transformation is required, so it's not just
a cognitive shift, but in order to be more
reconciled to death. You may need to change your
moral outlook in a way where you kind of
live your life from a slightly more expansive perspective
and you, and you consider yourself part of an
ongoing um you know, process or reality or what
have you. And, and you know, in the funeral
rites, ashes to ashes, dust to dust, it's all
sort of thing. There are references to that idea
that we come from dust, we go back to
dust and we're part of the whole cycle of
life. Do you remember I was just trying to
find a way for people to take consolation er
in, in that notion, yeah.
So for people to get a better understanding of
the sort of standing that Schopenhauer has uh when
it comes to the history of philosophy, who are
some of the most prominent people, philosophers he influenced?
Good, well, the names that spring to mind are.
Friedrich Nietzsche, that's the one that immediately springs to
mind because Nietzsche was obsessed with Schopenhauer after discovering
him when Nietzsche was a young man. They never
met. Schopenhauer, and Nietzsche was about 16 when Schopenhauer
died and wasn't, you know, uh, interested in philosophy
really at that point. He starts out in classics
and moves into philosophy. Um, BUT Nietzsche took up
this challenge of pessimism, uh, and tried to come
up with a solution to it that wasn't the
negation of life, but it was actually its opposite.
One way to understand Nietzsche's project is various different
ways of overcoming Schopenhauer and inspired pessimism, um, by
affirming life, whether it's through art or. You know,
self-creation or value creation, there's lots of different ideas
that Nietzsche, experiments with over the course of his
career, so there's, there's that, the early Wittgenstein, um,
so, Wittgenstein was kind of, in a way that
may be disingenuous, famously kind of, Didn't read much
philosophy, but it was kind of a natural born
logician and philosopher and um, but one philosopher he
really did read was, was Schopenhauer and the kind
of traces of Kantianism in the early Wittgenstein in
the, in the tractus, the, the sense in which
the tractator may be some sort of transcendental project,
um may be influenced by the way that that
Schopenhauer presents Kantian philosophy in, in, in, in his
more theoretical works. Um, ANOTHER in the philosophy world,
another actual philosopher that rings to mind is Max
Horkheimer. Um, OF the Frankfurt School, um, who was
a, a, a member of the Schopenhauer Society since
1917 or something like that, very early, you can
look at the, the list of members on the,
in the, in that edition of the Schopenhauer book.
So, um, and he was actually the first philosopher
that, uh, Horkheimer read supposedly, um, and, and there's
another interesting one which is that when he met
his wife, when Horkheimer met his wife, or the
woman who would become his wife, he did a
very odd thing which is to give her a
reading list. And top of that reading list was
Schopenhauer's essay on er humanity's metaphysical need or man's
need for metaphysics. So he thought that it was
required reading for any prospective partner to, to, to
read Schopenhauer. And later in the post-war period, Horkheimer
becomes, you know, even more deeply involved with the
er the Schopenhauer Society. He gives addresses at their
conferences that then become seminal papers. Um, HE actually
co-teaches with the president of the Schopenhauer Society, Arthur
Hoopscher, who also works in Frankfurt. They, they teach
seminars together on the philosophy of religion. And one
difference between Horkheimer and on the one hand and
and Nietzsche and Wittgenstein on the other is that,
So there's very much, like lots of philosophers, there's
a distinction between the early and the later, and
I, you know, you'll know that I specified the
early Wittgenstein because the later Wittgenstein doesn't seem that
interested in, in Schopenhauer. Certainly Nietzsche, you know, he
starts out as a kind of self, you know,
labeling card carrying Schopenhauer and then by the end
of it he thinks he's Schopenhauer's polar antipode. Whereas
the difference with Horkheimer is that Horkheimer doesn't seem
to want to have this instinct to kind of
kill the father, he doesn't wanna disavow his early
influences. If anything, Horkheimer leans into them. So Horkheimer's
a good example I think because he doesn't turn
his back on Schopenhauer, he's kind of Schopenhauer from
beginning to end, even though if you read Horkheimer's
work, you don't see that much Schopenhauer in it
because it's maybe bedded on a quite a deep
level, whereas you see more discussion of Hegel and
Marx and the tradition that the, the Frankfurt School
falls into. Those are some philosophers or, or, you
know, intellectuals. Um, AND then the, the actual, the
influence is much wider if we talk about creative
artists in particular writers. So because Schopenhauer's such a
great writer, you know, we started this conversation with
me saying that I loved the way Schopenhauer writes.
Lots of people did too, so the list is
endless, Proust and Hardy and Kafka and er Thomas
Mann and Jorge Luis Borges. Simone de Beauvoir, Iris
Murdoch, um. Schopenhauer, you know, Beauvoir and Murdoch obviously
are philosophers as well as novelists. Um, Sherman I
was very influential in the arts, uh, not least
because he thought that the arts were a way
of escaping suffering, but also because he was kind
of a model of a philosopher artist, you know,
that that's what Thomas Mann calls him, an artist
of thought. They thought he was really stylish as
well as always in tune with quite the quite
deep human, uh, issues that often motivate works of
art. Samuel Beckett was another one, you know, Beckett
was a was a. And you can see the
influence of Schopenhauer's pessimism in how it comes out
in Beckett, given the kind of Piketty and very
sparse, um, austere, hard, absurd worldview, yeah,
yeah. And finally, what is Schopenhauer's contemporary relevance, I
mean, what is his relevance nowadays?
Ah, good question. I mean, so a, a kind
of very tempting and obvious answer is that these
are pessimistic times I feel, or, or, You know,
um I think that Schopenhauer's. Um, WE can sympathize
with Schopenhauer because things seem kind of gloomy these
days, and actually that's one of the reasons why
Horkheimmer liked him was that, Schopenhauer was unafraid, he
he wasn't kind of burying his head in the
sand and kind of thinking wishfully and optimistically that
things will turn out right. Um, SO he takes,
you know, suffering seriously, um. I think that's something
that that that people can resonate with today given
the spirit of the times. Um, Having said that,
you know, that makes Schopenhauer's relevance quite time specific,
as if like, well if, if we were all,
if, if we were in a better place globally,
um, these days, maybe we wouldn't have a need
for Schopenhauer, but one has to remember that the
pessimism that Schopenhauer has in mind is something that
he thinks of as being perennial and independent of,
you know, the ups and downs of, you know,
human history and civilization, so there's something that's always
gonna be relevant about Schopenhauer. Uh, IF, if, if
he's right that he's speaking to something that's universal
and transhistorical, then the things that Schopenhauer, um, is
talking about the struggles of being a human. Are
just never gonna go out of fashion, never gonna
become irrelevant, and, and, and, and, and he's reaching
back to that history when he talks about, the
ancient Greeks, the ancient Indians, um, you know, he,
he, he's saying look, they were human too and
the Buddha was going through the things that you're
going through and, Um, and Sophocles was going through
the things that you're going through, and Shakespeare was
going through the things that you're going through, and,
and, and, and all of them were picking up
on something that's never, you know, um, unfortunately an
inellimitable part, you know, much as we might want
to get rid of it, it's an inellimitable part
of, of what it is to be human, so
that's always gonna be relevant. And then to sort
of slightly take the edge off the dark. Side
of that, I just think, you know, Schopenhauer's views
on compassion. Are quite important because in times of
doom and gloom, when, when, when all the things
that we're going through, not only kind of can't
be taken out of us but are really at
the forefront of our minds because we're seeing so
much inhumanity, and brutality and tragedy, um, the reminder
that the solution to that is to, to try
to be compassionate, to try to, Really be moved
to act by the suffering of others, I think
that's one of the, you know, one of the
things that we do need today, um, to see
that um, if we lose that then everything really
is lost, er if we didn't have compassion, I
think, you know, one thing I start out the
book by saying is that if we didn't have
compassion, Schopenhauer's view would be not just pessimistic but,
Intolerably nihilistic. It's only because we can hold each
other up with compassion that, that, that Schopenhauer's, you
know, I think Schopenhauer is, is, gives us a
view that we can, that we can live our
lives with. So there's that, I think so it's
the, the message of kind of, Historical pessimism, also
transhistorical pessimism and compassion as a solution, or as
at least a way of er bearing with the
weight of that pessimism, that's what I think Trevor
Noah has to, to say today.
So the book is again Arthur Schopenhauer, The, The
Life and Thought of Philosophy's Greatest Pessimist, and I'm
leaving a link to it in the description of
the interview. And Doctor Bather Woods, apart from the
book, where can people find your work on the
internet?
Oh good, um, so um if you were to
look on the Warwick website, you would find my
staff page which has some of my academic publications
and some of my forthcoming publications are going to
be open access, so, so do have a look
for those, but I've also written for, Um, sort
of public formats like Eon magazine, Psyche magazine, these
are just free to access articles which talk about
the things I've mentioned. I'm also on sort of
forms of social media. I'm on Instagram. My, my
handle there is at all academic, all_academic. Um, I'm
on Blue Sky. I still have an X account,
although only until my book is out and then
I might get rid of it, but um. Um,
BUT I'm on Blue Sky as well at, at,
at, uh, David Bay the Woods, um, so you
can find me there as well. So I'm quite,
you know, quite a bit online, people will be
able to, to, to find me, uh, if they
look, yeah.
Good, so thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show, it's been a
real pleasure to talk with you.
No, it's been great and I've, it's been nice
actually to talk around the book as well cos
lots of things I said today are kind of
things that didn't actually make it into the book.
So it's been nice to sort of talk around
it as well as about it. So thank you
very much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarinth, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.